Add section on extending napari (#286)
napari/docs: docs/howtos/extending/magicgui.md

---
jupytext:
  cell_metadata_filter: -all
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.8.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---
(creating-widgets)=

# Creating widgets

Widgets are small composable graphical elements that can be added to the `napari` user
interface. The easiest way to add a widget is by using

> [`magicgui`](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/), a python package that assists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`magicgui`](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/), a Python package that assists
```

in building widgets. It is a general abstraction layer on GUI toolkit backends (like

> Qt), with an emphasis on mapping python types to widgets. This enables you to easily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Qt), with an emphasis on mapping Python types to widgets. This enables you to easily
```

create widgets using annotations.
If you require more extensibility though, you can create your own widget `class` that
subclasses [`QtWidgets.QWidget`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qwidget.html).

This document will describe each widget creation method, in increasing order of
extensibility;

1. creating a widget from a function and
   [`magicgui`](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/) (simplest but least extensible
   and flexible)
2. create a widget class that subclasses a
   [`magicgui` widget class](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/widgets/#the-widget-hierarchy)
3. create a widget class that subclasses
   [`QtWidgets.QWidget`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qwidget.html) (most extensible but also
   the most difficult to implement)

> For more examples, the [GUI gallery examples](https://napari.org/stable/_tags/gui.html)
> has some widget examples. Additionally,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more examples, see the [GUI gallery examples](https://napari.org/stable/_tags/gui.html). Additionally,
```

Author: This is awkward because not all of the 'GUI' examples are widget examples. I've added this in parenthesis.

[cookiecutter-napari-plugin](https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-plugin)
has more robust widget examples that you can adapt to your needs.

There are two ways to then add a widget to a `napari` viewer:

> * via {meth}`napari.qt.Window.add_dock_widget` in a python script or interactive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* via {meth}`napari.qt.Window.add_dock_widget` in a Python script or interactive
```

  console (see [How to launch napari](getting_started) for details on launching
  and interacting programmatically with `napari`)

> * adding a [widget contribution](widgets-contribution-guide) in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* by adding a [widget contribution](widgets-contribution-guide) in a
```

)
def threshold_magic_widget(
    img_layer: "napari.layers.Image", threshold: "float"
) -> "napari.types.LabelsData":
    return img_as_float(img_layer.data) > threshold

# Create the viewer and add an image
viewer = napari.view_image(data.camera())
# Add widget to viewer
viewer.window.add_dock_widget(threshold_magic_widget)
```

```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-input]
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer.window._qt_window.resize(1225, 900)
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="A magicgui threshold widget")
```

Below we first document how to use napari-specific
[parameter](magicgui-parameter-annotations) and
[return type](magicgui-return-annotations) annotations to easily create your own
widgets. We then explain how to use
[`magicgui` function widgets in plugin widget contributions](magicgui-plugin-widgets).

```{note}
For a more complex example of a `magicgui.magicgui` widget, see the
[gaussian blur example](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/generated_examples/napari/napari_parameter_sweep/#napari-parameter-sweeps)
in the `magicgui` documentation.
```

(magicgui-parameter-annotations)=

### Parameter annotations

> The following napari types may be used as *parameter* type annotations in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `napari` types may be used as *parameter* type annotations in
```

```

Like above, it will be rendered as a {class}`~magicgui.widgets.ComboBox`.

#### Annotating as `napari.Viewer`

Lastly, if you need to access the actual {class}`~napari.viewer.Viewer` instance
in which the widget is docked, you can annotate one of your parameters as a
{class}`napari.Viewer`. This will not automatically render as a
{class}`~magicgui.widgets.ComboBox` so you will need to
[specify the *widget option*](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/type_map/#customizing-widget-options-with-typingannotated)
to map this parameter to.

```python
from napari import Viewer

@magicgui
def my_widget(viewer: Viewer):
  ...
```

```{caution}
Please use this sparingly, as a last resort. If you need to *add* layers
to the viewer from your function, prefer one of the return-annotation methods
described [below](#return-annotations).
If you find that you require the viewer instance because of functionality that
is otherwise missing here, please consider opening an issue in the
[napari issue tracker](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new/choose),
describing your use case.
```
(magicgui-return-annotations)=

### Return annotations

> The following napari types may be used as *return* type annotations in `magicgui`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `napari` types may be used as *return* type annotations in `magicgui`
```

def make_points(n_points=40) -> napari.types.LayerDataTuple:
  data = 500 * np.random.rand(n_points, 2)
  # 'My Points' is the name of an existing layer
  return (data, {'name': 'My Points'}, 'points')

viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.window.add_dock_widget(make_points)
# calling this multiple times will just update 'My Points'
make_points()
make_points.n_points.value = 80
make_points()
make_points.n_points.value = 120
make_points()
```

```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-input]
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer.window._qt_window.resize(1225, 900)
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="A magicgui widget updating an existing layer")
```

### Avoid imports with forward references

Sometimes, it is undesirable to import and/or depend on `napari` directly just
to provide type annotations.  It is possible to avoid importing `napari`
entirely by annotating with the string form of the napari type.  This is called
a [Forward
reference](https://peps.python.org/pep-0484/#forward-references):

```python
@magicgui
def my_func(data: 'napari.types.ImageData') -> 'napari.types.ImageData':
    ...
```

:::{tip}

If you'd like to maintain IDE type support and autocompletion, you can

> do so by hiding the napari imports inside of a {attr}`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do so by hiding the `napari` imports inside of a {attr}`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`
```

This document will describe each widget creation method, in increasing order of
extensibility;

1. creating a widget from a function and `magicgui` (simplest but least extensible and
   flexible)
2. create a widget class that subclasses a
   [`magicgui` widget class](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/widgets/#the-widget-hierarchy)
3. create a widget class that subclasses `QtWidgets.QWidget` (most extensible but also
   the most difficult to implement)

Additionally,
the [cookiecutter-napari-plugin](https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-plugin)
has more robust widget examples.

There are two ways to then add a widget to a `napari` viewer:

* via {meth}`napari.qt.Window.add_dock_widget` in a python script or interactive
  console (see [How to launch napari](getting_started) for details on launching
  and interacting programmatically with `napari`)
* adding a [widget contribution](widgets-contribution-guide) in a
  [plugin](plugins-index).

There is an important implementation distinction between the two methods;
{meth}`napari.qt.Window.add_dock_widget` expects an *instance* of a widget, like a
{class}`magicgui.widgets.Widget` or a {class}`qtpy.QtWidgets.QWidget`, whereas

> [Widget contributions](widgets-contribution-guide), expects a widget *class*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Widget contributions](widgets-contribution-guide), expect a `callable` (like a function or a class) that will return a widget instance.
```

Author: Agree, i kept the original wording but it felt wrong to me too.

to provide support for napari-specific type annotations. This makes it easy to
use `magicgui` to build widgets in `napari`. Note all type annotations below *require*
that the resulting widget be added to a napari viewer.

Below we demonstrate how to create a simple threshold widget using `magicgui` and add
it to the viewer. Note the `auto_call` parameter tells `magicgui` to call the function
whenever a `threshold_magic_widget` parameter changes, thus the function is called
as soon as we add the 'camera' image.

```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-output]
from skimage import data
from skimage.util import img_as_float

import napari

@magicgui(
    threshold={"widget_type": "FloatSlider", "max": 1}, auto_call=True
)
def threshold_magic_widget(
    img_layer: "napari.layers.Image", threshold: "float"
) -> "napari.types.LabelsData":
    return img_as_float(img_layer.data) > threshold

# Create the viewer and add an image
viewer = napari.view_image(data.camera())
# Add widget to viewer
viewer.window.add_dock_widget(threshold_magic_widget)
```

```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-input]
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

> viewer.window._qt_window.resize(750, 550)

Reviewer 2: could we maybe make this a bit bigger? The screenshots really squish up the image. If we can't I think it's nbd

Author: Done, hopefully better.

nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="A magicgui threshold widget")
```

Below we first document how to use napari-specific
[parameter](magicgui-parameter-annotations) and
[return type](magicgui-return-annotations) annotations to easily create your own
widgets. We then explain how to use
[`magicgui` function widgets in plugin widget contributions](magicgui-plugin-widgets).

```{note}
For a more complex example of a `magicgui.magicgui` widget, see the
[gaussian blur example](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/generated_examples/napari/napari_parameter_sweep/#napari-parameter-sweeps)
in the `magicgui` documentation.
```

(magicgui-parameter-annotations)=

> ## Parameter annotations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Parameter annotations
```

Should this be a triple heading to fit under the magicgui bit? And same with `Return annotations` below?

Author: Yes I changed this then changed it back. But you're right,  you don't annotate a widget class in the same way

:::

(widget-classes)=

## Widget classes

Generating a widget by creating a widget class allows you to have more control over
your widget. Your widget class must subclass {class}`magicgui.widgets.Widget` (i.e.,
a [`magicgui` widget class](https://pyapp-kit.github.io/magicgui/widgets/#the-widget-hierarchy))
or {class}`QtWidgets.QWidget`. It can then be added to the `napari` viewer
by instantiating the widget class, then adding this via
{meth}`napari.qt.Window.add_dock_widget`. You can also create a plugin and add
your widget class (*not* instantiated widget) as a
[widget contribution](widgets-contribution-guide).

Below we will detail how to use various parent classes to generate a widget.
There are several `magicgui` widget classes so we will only document the use of the
two most useful in the `napari` context; {class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui` and
{class}`magicgui.widgets.Container`.
We will begin with the simplest but least extensible parent class and end with the
parent class the most extensible.

### `magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui`

Creating a widget by subclassing {class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui` is similar in

> principal to using the {func}`@magicgui <magicgui.magicgui>` decorator. Decorating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
principle to using the {func}`@magicgui <magicgui.magicgui>` decorator. Decorating
```

a function with {func}`@magicgui <magicgui.magicgui>` is equivalent to passing
the same function to {class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui`'s `function` parameter.
The remaining {class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui` parameters essentially
mirror {func}`@magicgui <magicgui.magicgui>`'s parameters.
Indeed, {class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui` is the type that is returned by
{func}`@magicgui <magicgui.magicgui>`. Subclassing
{class}`magicgui.widgets.FunctionGui` however, gives you access to the

> `native` `QWidget` of your widget, allowing you change its appearance and add

Reviewer 2: Can `FunctionGui` guis receive the viewer as a parameter?

Author: I would think so but let me check

Author: Checked with the plugins PR (#4991) and yes it can. Does that affect it accessing the native `QWidget` ?!

Reviewer 2: nope, doesn't affect that, I was just curious. I think a big benefit of the "class based" vs. "function based" widgets is that you can access the viewer and connect more complex events/callbacks in a simpler and more direct way. Function based widgets can also receive the viewer and do all that stuff, but the code ends up being more spaghettified

Author: I think magicgui functions are able to access the viewer! Its done via `magicgui.register_type`

Reviewer 2: They are indeed. I just find when looking at plugin code that there's a correlation between function based widgets that take the viewer and needlessly complex logical flow - I suspect in many of these cases using a class based design would simplify things. But that's kinda hard to capture in this one doc lol so you can mostly ignore this comment chain for the purposes of review

Author: >  plugin code that there's a correlation between function based widgets that take the viewer and needlessly complex logical flow

I had no idea, why is it more complicated to use the viewer via a function?

        )
        # do whatever other initialization you want here

# Create a `viewer`
viewer = napari.Viewer()
# Instantiate your widget
my_widg = MyGui(my_function)
# Add widget to `viewer`
viewer.window.add_dock_widget(my_widg)
```

Class widgets are easy to use as
[plugin widget contributions](widgets-contribution-guide). Simply provide the
class definition and add to the plugin manifest.

### `magicgui.widgets.Container`

The {class}`magicgui.widgets.Container` allows you to build more complex widgets
from sub-widgets. This gives you more control over each sub-widget and how callbacks

> are connected to events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are connected to events. You can still use the convenient `magicgui` widget generation features as shown below.
```
